[1]C. Guckelsberger, C. Salge, y S. Colton, “Addressing the ‘Why?’ in Computational Creativity: A Non-Anthropocentric, Minimal Model of Intentional Creative Agency”, presentado en Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Computational Creativity, 2017, 2017, Consultado: may 02, 2020. [En línea]. Disponible en: http://ccg.doc.gold.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/iccc2017_guckelsberger.pdf.
Answering the “why?” would allow for the attribution of intentional agency,
and likely lead to a stronger perception of creativity. Enactive artificial intelligence, 
a framework inspired by autopoietic enactive cognitive science, equips us with the necessary conditions
for a value function to reflect a system’s own intrinsic goals. 

We have shown via case-studies that existing CC systems,
typically with a focus on human creativity, cannot provide
a satisfactory answer to why they are being creative because
they lack intrinsic goal-ownership. We have adopted the enactive AI framework for a non-anthropocentric account of
intentional agency in minimal, embodied agents. Creativity,
as commonly perceived, seems to be maximally removed
from how simple organisms survive and cope within an everchanging environment. 
By showing that constitutively autonomous and adaptive agents must necessarily perform 
intrinsically valuable and novel actions, we have grounded two
of the strongest factors in the attribution of creativity in the
essence of the living.

[2]N. Davis, “An Enactive Approach to Facilitate Interactive Machine Learning for Co-Creative Agents”, en Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and Cognition, Glasgow, United Kingdom, jun. 2015, pp. 345–346, doi: 10.1145/2757226.2764773.
This paper introduced an enactive approach to interactive
machine learning. We describe two co-creative agents
developed with our enactive model of creativity. This
model formalizes the ideas of participatory sense-making

[3]M. Guzdial y M. Riedl, “An Interaction Framework for Studying Co-Creative AI”, arXiv:1903.09709 [cs], mar. 2019, Consultado: may 01, 2020. [En línea]. Disponible en: http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.09709.
Note> "Creation of a new framework as the one intended in our thesis"

In this paper we present a general framework for representing turn-based co-creative systems. Such
a framework allows for direct comparisons between distinct systems, from which one can generate
discussion, hypotheses, and potential generalizations on the impact of these differences

[4]P. T. Ravikumar, K. McGee, y L. Wyse, “Back to the experiences: Empirically grounding the development of musical co-creative partners in co-experiences”, p. 7, 2018.
When it comes to co-experiences, free improvising musicians place more importance to listening and responding to
their co-performers over social interaction, physical movements, and musical skill

These finding suggest the need to reframe research on cocreativity and creative partnerships in terms of subjective
experience rather than specific musical, communicative, or
physical attributes of the co-creative partner.

The study of co-experiences, without physicality, enables
a level of meaning making that is common across humans
and computational systems. This allows us to address the
problem of creative bias with computational systems. During the interviews, musicians identified improvisation pieces
in which physicality was an optional component of the performance. In conditions where physicality does not play a
part, co-experiences are felt only through actions of listening and responding. This opens up a possibility
 of studying co-experiences in experimental configurations that enable the same level of meaning across human and computer
co-creators. In such situations, it is possible to uncover biases with machine creativity through comparisons with human creativity.
This allows us to address the problem of bias with machine co-creators.

. A set of minimal conditions
for the co-experiences were identified as good focal points
that would allow us to study co-experiences in experimental
configurations. This enables us to address certain important
challenges that impeded the development of creative computational partnerships and opens avenues for further research
in this domai

[5]P. Karimi, K. Grace, M. L. Maher, y N. Davis, “Evaluating Creativity in Computational Co-Creative Systems”, arXiv:1807.09886 [cs], jul. 2018, Consultado: may 02, 2020. [En línea]. Disponible en: http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.09886.
Note> "Creation of a new framework as the one intended in our thesis and some meta-analysis 
characteristics for the development of evaluation frameworks"

This paper provides a framework for evaluating creativity in
computational co-creative systems. The framework provides
a structure for comparing the evaluation of co-creative systems across specific examples and implementations, as well
comparing to other types of creative systems, such as autonomous creative systems and creativity support tools. By
asking questions such as who evaluates, when does evaluation occur, what is evaluated, and how evaluation is performed,
 we can broaden the scope of evaluation studies and
apply methods from one area of computational creativity to
another area.

Unlike fully autonomous creative systems and creativity
support tools, the creative process used by co-creative systems is not the result of a single agent, 
instead it is a collaboration. This means existing approaches to evaluating
computational creativity or HCI approaches to evaluate creativity support are insufficient. This identifies a new focus
for research in computational creativity to study how creativity can be evaluated in human/AI collaboration with the
combination and intersection of usability and creativity metrics. Evaluative methods and metrics are a step towards selfaware 
and intentional co-creative agents.

[6]P. M. Bodily y D. Ventura, “Explainability: An Aesthetic for Aesthetics in Computational Creative Systems”, p. 8, 2018.
As several in the field have asserted (and which we also assert), an autonomous aesthetic is a key component of creative systems.
 This assertion naturally begs the question:
What are the characteristics that a computational system
might use for selecting an aesthetic?

What makes a good aesthetic? As evidenced by the variety
of aesthetics implemented (implicitly or explicity) in extant
CC systems, many have pondered what good aesthetics for
CC systems might be. Our purpose is rather to consider
what all “good” aesthetics have in common.

These two examples suffice to demonstrate that an explainable aesthetic can contribute to the perception of a sentient,
 aesthetically-driven creative system. We await future
work to provide corroborative empirical evidence.

Relevant to the discussion of explaining aesthetics in a given
(possibly natural) language, it has been argued that the
concept of creativity, though human-conceived, should not
remain human-centric (Guckelsberger, Salge, and Colton
2017). While this may be true, it is also true that creativity
does not happen in a vacuum, but emerges in the interaction
between an agent’s “thoughts” and a sociocultural context
(Csikszentmihalyi 1996; Bown 2015; Jordanous 2015). It
may not be that creativity is human-centric, but until substantial non-human sociocultural contexts are presented, it
seems reasonable to expect that creativity in computational
systems depends on at least an interaction with human sociocultural contexts.

We seem, to a large extent, to have focused thus far as a
field on systems which (possibly by some arguably creative
process) generate artefacts. We do so to the detriment of
the field whose stated focus is on the greater umbrella of behaviors (Colton and Wiggins 2012). We may find benefit in
increasingly promoting research toward systems which, independent of their generative abilities, are creative by virtue
of their ability to interact with and internally react to their
sociocultural context (see Figure 4).

Systems with an ability to autonomously initiate, change,
and explain an (domain-agnostic) aesthetic deriving from
a sociocultural context would be a significant contribution
to the field of CC, even without (domain-specific) generative capabilities.

[7]L. H. Malinin, “How Radical Is Embodied Creativity? Implications of 4E Approaches for Creativity Research and Teaching”, Front. Psychol., vol. 10, 2019, doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02372.
Creative thinking is an essential skill for the future workforce
(Barbot et al., 2015; Jules and Sundberg, 2018) and crucial
for solving wicked5
societal problems, such as overpopulation,
poverty, and climate change. However, creative process research
has largely stalled (Dietrich, 2007; Fryer, 2012; Glaveanu ˘ ,
2014b; Barbot et al., 2015) and has not been particularly
useful for informing educational psychology or pedagogical
practices (Plucker et al., 2004; Glaveanu ˘ , 2014b; Sawyer, 2018).
The field of creativity research is in crisis because, Glaveanu ˘
(2014a, p. 2) argues, “one of the most pervasive separations
creativity researchers make is between creator (or his brain)
and the social and material world.”

 Finally, metaphorical
creativity research could integrate a strong embodiment (RECS)
perspective to examine “mental” processes commonly associated
with creativity, such as imagination, incubation, and conceptual
combination. Slepian and Ambady (2014) demonstrated how
creation of novel embodied metaphors provides evidence of
embodied simulation. Approaches such as theirs could lend new
insights into, for example, the little understood phenomenon of
creative incubation leading to insight.

First, research in this area reveals that the common definition
of creativity, as the ability to produce something novel and
useful, does not adequately describe creativity-in-the-wild (i.e.,
real-world creativity). Creativity is situated practice; it involves
embodied experiences and is embedded in socio-material
environments. Dynamical systems approaches also describe how
creativity is enacted through person-environment interactions
and distributed among technological-material artifacts and other
people

Finally, theoretical
approaches — such as Baber’s (2019) concept of creativity as
technological reasoning or Rietveld and Brouwers’s (2017) notion
that it involves skilled intentionality toward optimal grip — begin
to address the demand for a new theoretical framework that
integrates the historically siloed 4Ps of creativity research.

What, then, are next steps for embodied creativity research?
First and foremost, a new definition of creativity is needed
to describe creativity as situated practice, emerging through
person-environment interactions (material/technological as well
as socio-cultural). Second, new conceptual and methodological
tools must be adopted, including developmental and dynamical
systems approaches, to better understand person-environment
relationships (for example, how and when technological artifacts
are instrumental) throughout the creative process — as well as
how these relationships evolve with acquired domain expertise.
Third, a common theoretical framework, informed by RECS,
would provide a starting point to integrate research in the 4P’s,
including the often overlooked workplace or classroom physical
environment (creative press) and the emerging neuroscience
of creativity research stream (creative process). Dynamical
systems approaches highlight the role of perception in creativity.
Skilled perceptual abilities can be taught, as is a focus of
pedagogical techniques in design programs. Yet, there is little
understanding of how perceptual abilities lead to creative
expertise. Architectural settings, such as learning spaces, shape

sensorimotor experiences, which, in term, shape perceptions
of affordances available to inhabitants. However, creative
press research has prioritized socio-cultural over materialtechnological environments. 

Developing creativity in
educational (or workplace) settings is a complex endeavor —
and one that has not benefitted enough from creativity research
(Barbot et al., 2015; Sawyer, 2018). For creativity to become a
learning competency, essential for the future workforce, research
approaches must consider its multidimensionality to effectively
inform pedagogical practices — and acknowledge the role of the
body, artifacts, and the larger socio-material environment in the
development of creative expertise.

[8]M. Jacob, “Improvisational Artificial Intelligence for Embodied Co-creativity”, ago. 2019, Consultado: may 01, 2020. [En línea]. Disponible en: https://smartech.gatech.edu/handle/1853/62270.
 Note>"Computational Models for Evaluating Creativity
 With perspectives on product and process, a really brief overview of current evaluation frameworks"

[9]A. Kantosalo y A. Jordanous, “Role-Based Perceptions of Computer Participants in Human-Computer Co-Creativity”, presentado en 7th Computational Creativity Symposium at AISB 2020, London, UK, feb. 2020, Consultado: may 01, 2020. [En línea]. Disponible en: https://sites.google.com/view/aisb2020cc/home.
The existing role classifications that we have for human-computer
co-creativity are theoretical, in the sense that they have not been
experimentally verified. They are essentially hypothetical labels, assigned rather than analysed. 
In future work we will evaluate the current role classifications as they are manifested in practice, which will
help us to identify gaps and coverage of the existing classifications.

In this paper, we outlined and categorised the space of co-creative
possibilities covered by the current sets of roles in the literature.
We looked for inspiration from reviewing how role classification
schemes are used to understand and analyse creative collaboration
between people, and we reflected on implications from this review.
Role classifications in co-creativity have appeared over recent
years and have increasingly afforded computational co-creativity participants with more creative agency 
and more varied responsibilities.
We seem to be moving towards a less limited set of views on what
computational participants can do, though we are not yet at a point
where computational participants are given the same agency as human participants.
In introducing extra roles to support the perception of computers in a wider range of creative behaviours, our end goal actually
is to reach a point that human-human collaborative creativity is at,
i.e. where predefined generally applicable roles are no longer necessary at all. This seems somewhat contradictory; however we argue
that roles have emerged as an important analytical tool to study the
potential of computational partners in collaborative creativity. Roles
can also act as prompts to identify and highlight underexplored possibilities: becoming stepping stones towards more creativity potential.